---
title: "What is the best renewable energy?"
date: 2024-05-31
author: "Gabriele Gatti"
tags: ["science", "renewables", "climate change"]
summary: "Discussing pros and cons of various renewable energy sources."
---

# What is the best renewable energy source?

<span class="date"> Date: 31th of May 2024 </span>
<br />
<span class="date">Last Update on: 20th of June 2024</span><br />

Climate change has never been a greater global concern than in recent years. While more extreme wheater and climate events are becoming more frequent by time, it is also becoming essential to work on finding alternative and <strong>cleaner ways to produce energy</strong>.
<br /><br />
In this article I'm going to analyze and compare some of the most common renewable energy sources, like Solar energy, Wind energy, Hydro energy, and help deciding whether one is the best choice for a specific scenario.
<br />
<strong>Let's dive in!</strong> 

<br /><br />

## Solar energy
When speaking about renewable energy, Solar energy tends to be among the top choices, and for good reasons.<br />
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_power" target="_blank" title="Opens a Wikipedia page">Solar energy</a> is provided by the radiation of the Sun.<br />

### Pros
It is <strong>highly abundant and available</strong> almost everywhere on Earth, as well as sustainable and long-lasting.
To collect energy we mainly use solar panels, that are increasingly becoming more efficient and cheaper over the years. They generally have a lifespan of about 30 years.<br />
The use of batteries also can provide reliable and continuos supply of energy even if the weather conditions, such as clouds or nights, don't allow to collect energy directly from the Sun.<br />
This helps making a more efficient use of solar power and also reducing electricity bills.<br />

### Cons
There is still an upfront cost to face for the installation of solar panels, the batteries, and for all other necessary system requirements.<br />
Another aspect to consider is the average amount of <strong>Solar exposition</strong>. Some areas on Earth receive more sunlight than others.<br />
This becomes more clear to understand if we compare countries alongside the equator to those closer to the <strong>Artic Circle</strong>.<br /> For the second group, there can be periods of several months without sunlight. This means that on this period it is impossible to collect solar energy.
<br />
Solar panels also are <strong>not immune to weather conditions</strong>, like hail, snow, lighting strikes, and rapid temperature changes, that can effect the integrity and so the efficiency of them.
<br />
To produce a lot solar energy, there is the need to build a lot of solar panels, which results in a high land-use, that may be not ideal for areas that don't offer much free room.
<br />
Moreover, the <strong>production and disposal</strong> of those solar panel and battery components can be damaging for the environment.
<br /><br />

## Wind Energy
Wind energy is another popular option among renewable energy sources.<br />
Wind is a result of the combination between Earth's rotation, heat coming from the Sun and change in air pressure.

### Pros
Same as solar energy, wind energy is known for being <strong>abudant and clean</strong>.
<br />
Wind energy is tipically collected with wind turbines, which don't require to consume non-renewable energy sources to operate.<br />
Those turbines also tend not to require much maintainance and can produce a lot of energy if wind currents are consistent and constant in speed.<br />
While in-land turbines are cheaper than offshore ones, they both still provide cheap renewable energy.<br />
There is a higher energy potential compared to Solar panels for areas that get a lot of wind. As long as there is suffcient wind, there can be <strong>energy production even during the night</strong>, althought it may be lower compared to the day.

### Cons
Wind turbines have more moveable parts than Solar panels, which results in <strong>higher maintainance</strong> costs, and generally lower lifespan.
<br />
Turbine blades often are source of collisions with birds, especially if wind turbines are built in bird migration areas.
<br />
Wind turbines, like Solar panels, aren't immune either to geographical issues. Some areas of Earth naturally receive more consistent wind currents than others, like the Northen Sea. So, regions that offer <strong>less wind</strong>, like mountains, tall forests or even tall human constructions, are less effective in collecting Wind Energy.
<br /><br />
The construction of several wind turbines can <strong>disrupt natural habitats</strong>, but also has a negative impact on these visually and acoustically, by altering the visual landscape and producing noise and vibration from blades rotation.
<br /><br />

## Hydro Energy
Another big name among renewable energies is Hydro energy, which is generated by the motion of water that causes turbines to move, and so generating electrical energy.

### Pros
As it relies on water flow to produce electrical energy, it is clean and sustainable and generally abundant.
<br /> 
Hydroelectric power plants generally have long lifespans with low operating costs.
<br />
As water is often stored in large quantity with the use of dams, it is also <strong>highly reliable</strong> and easy to regulate based on the demand with the use of various flood control systems.<br />
It is a particulary effective energy source in those regions of Earth that offer frequent precipitations and access to large bodies of water such as rivers.<br />
Due to the use of dams, it is less susceptive by daily weather.

## Cons
Compared to the other energy sources, it is the <strong>most environmentally disruptive</strong>, due to the construction of dams that heavily change water distribution in a region, and so effecting local flora and fauna.
<br />
By far also has the <strong>highest upfront costs</strong>, as there is an higher amount of infrastructure.
<br />
Alongside with Solar and Wind energy, Hydro energy isn't also as much effective or fiasable everywhere. It works the best if there is a consistent flow of water, which it may not be the case for every country. Some rivers can alter flood and drought periods.
<br />
With the presence of dams there is a risk that they will collapse and cause an <strong>environmental disaster</strong>.

## Other renewables
While this blog mainly focus on comparing the three most popular energy resources, there are other highly valuable solutions that deserves at least to be mentioned:
<ul>
<li><strong>Geothermal Energy</strong>, uses the heat coming from the Earth's core. It is sustainable, clean, durable, but limited to certain locations, initial upfront costs, environmental concerns due to drilling activities.</li>
<li><strong>Biomass Energy</strong>, generated by organic materials, agricultural residues, and also animal waste. It is regenerative, helps reducing Methane and waste, and it is versatile, but there are environmental concerns due to deforestation, air pollution, land use and water consumption.</li>
<li><strong>Tidal Energy</strong>, produces electricity from tides. It is consistent and predictable, with low operating cost and minimal waste, but limited to certain locations, initial upfront costs, environmental concerns due to the disruption of marine ecosystems.</li>
</ul>

## To sum up

<br />
At the end of the day there is nothing like the perfect "one fits for all" solution. Every renewable energy source has strengths and weaknesses, and ideally every country should aim towards a combination of all them to benefit the most.


Main sources: Wikipedia, Earth.org.



<br /><br />


<style>
.date {
    color: grey;
    font-size: 16px
}
td, th {
    border: 1px solid black;
    padding: 5px;
}
</style>